case weight post (#578)
tidyverse/tidyverse.org: content/blog/case-weights/index.Rmd

---
output: hugodown::hugo_document

slug: case-weights
title: Using case weights with tidymodels
date: 2022-05-01
author: Max Kuhn
description: >
    The tidymodels packages have enabled the use of case weights across many 
    packages. This post discusses the changes. 

photo:
  url: https://unsplash.com/photos/iLKK0eFTywU
  author: Graphic Node

# one of: "deep-dive", "learn", "package", "programming", "roundup", or "other"
categories: [deep-dive] 
tags: [tidymodels parsnip]
---

<!--
TODO:
* [ ] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml
* [ ] Edit (or delete) the description; note this appears in the Twitter card
* [ ] Pick category and tags (see existing with `hugodown::tidy_show_meta()`)
* [ ] Find photo & update yaml metadata
* [ ] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [ ] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [ ] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [ ] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package
* [ ] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE)
library(doMC)
registerDoMC(cores = 10)
library(tidymodels)
tidymodels_prefer()
theme_set(theme_bw())
```

> After quite a bit of time, the tidymodels packages have enabled the use of case weights. There has been a ton of work and some technical hurdles to overcome. The diversity of the types of weights, and how they should be used, is very complex but I think that we've come up with a solution that is fairly straight-forward for the users. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After quite a bit of time, the tidymodels packages have finally enabled the use of case weights. There has been a ton of work and multiple technical hurdles to overcome. The diversity of the types of weights, and how they should be used, is very complex, but I think that we've come up with a solution that is fairly straight-forward for users. 
```

> ## What are case weights?

Reviewer 2: "Case weights" does not appear to be standard terminology in either Statistics or Machine Learning so you are defining something new tidymodels specific technology here

Author: What terminology would you use?

> Case weights are non-negative numbers that are used to impact how much each observation influences a model fit. 

Reviewer 3: "are used to impact" ?= "determine"

Author: I went with "specify"

> There are different types of case weights whose terminology can be very different across problem domains. Here are some examples: 

Reviewer 2: I recommend aligning your examples about using weights in classical statistical settings with what Thomas Lumley and Andrew Gelman have published. Lumley https://notstatschat.rbind.io/2020/08/04/weights-in-statistics/ talks about precision weights, frequency weights, and sampling weights. Your examples fit these categories.

Gelman says he agrees with Lumley: https://statmodeling.stat.columbia.edu/2021/01/17/weights-in-statistics/

You would avoid having to go into deep explanations and ward off potential criticism if you line up with these guys in the three cases they talk about.

> * **Frequency weights** are integers that denote how many times a particular row of data has been observed. They help compress redundant rows into a smaller format. 

Author: I added "They help compress redundant rows into a single entry."

* **Importance weights** focus on how much each row of the data set should influence the model fit. These can be based on data or arbitrarily set to achieve some goal. 
* When survey respondents have different probabilities of selection, (inverse) **probability weights** can help remove bias from the results of a data analysis. 

> * If a data point has an associated precision, **analytic weighting** have help a model focus on the data points with less uncertainty (such as in meta-analysis).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If a data point has an associated precision, **analytic weighting** helps a model focus on the data points with less uncertainty (such as in meta-analysis).
```

> * If a data point has an associated precision, **analytic weighting** have help a model focus on the data points with less uncertainty (such as in meta-analysis).

Reviewer 2: remove "have" before "help"

There are undoubtedly more types of weights in other domains. 

Generally speaking, case weights are usually non-negative. 

## How are they used in base R?

> The best example is for categorical data where a small number of possible categories are observed many times. For example, the `UCBAdmissions` contains "Aggregate data on applicants to graduate school at Berkeley for the six largest departments in 1973 classified by admission and sex."

Reviewer 2: Remove all references to base R and replace them with Classical Statistical Models. Other statistical systems such as Stata and Minitab have similar constructs: https://support.minitab.com/en-us/minitab/18/help-and-how-to/modeling-statistics/regression/supporting-topics/basics/weighted-regression/#:~:text=Weighted%20regression%20is%20a%20method,a%20constant%20variance%20(homoscedasticity).

Also, rather than "best example" say something like a typical classical example would be for ...

```{r UCBAdmissions}
data("UCBAdmissions")
UCBAdmissions
```

> This is a 3D array, so let's convert to a rectangular data format:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This is a 3D array, so let's convert it to a rectangular data format:
```

```{r df}
library(tidymodels)

ucb <- 
  as_tibble(UCBAdmissions) %>% 
  mutate(across(where(is.character), ~ as.factor(.)))
ucb
```

There are `r nrow(ucb)` possible configurations of the variables but a total of `r sum(ucb$n)` observations. If we want to model the data in this format, using a logistic regression, we could  use

```{r glm}
glm_fit <-
  glm(
    Admit ~ Gender + Dept,
    data = ucb,
    weights = n,
    family = "binomial"
  )
glm_fit
```

_This is not quite right though_. There are 12 combinations of `Gender` and `Dept`. How can the model have 23 total degrees of freedom?

> If we are treating our data as binomial, the traditional method for fitting this model is to convert the data to a format with columns for the number of events and non-events (per covariate pattern). Let's convert our data into that format:

Reviewer 3: I'm used to seeing the term "predictor" (not "covariate") in tidymodels documentation. Is the choice of "covariate" intentional here?

Author: I think of "covariate" being more appropriate for an inferential model and "predictor" for predictive models.

```{r glm-events}
ucb_grouped_data <- 
  ucb %>% 
  pivot_wider(
    id_cols = c(Gender, Dept),
    names_from = Admit,
    values_from = n,
    values_fill = 0L
  )
ucb_grouped_data
```

Now, since there are really only `r nrow(ucb_grouped_data)` covariate combinations, the appropriate model can be created. 

```{r glm-grouped}
glm(
  cbind(Rejected, Admitted) ~ Gender + Dept,
  data = ucb_grouped_data,
  family = binomial
)
```

In both cases the model coefficients are the same; the standard errors and degrees of freedom are correct for the model with grouped data though. 

## Why is this so complicated? 

> Traditionally, the use of weights in base R functions are to fit the model and to report limited measures of model fit. Here, `glm()` reports the deviance while `lm()` shows estimates of the RMSE and adjusted-R<sup>2</sup>.

Reviewer 2: replace base R with classical statistical models

Reviewer 3: Maybe "classical implementations of statistical models" or something like that, since it's about the R implementation, not the model itself... "Traditional implementations of statistical models use weights to fit the model and report limited measures of model fit."

> Believe it or not, the logistic regression code shown above is somewhat straight-forward since the scope of the analysis is very small. There are a few things that we do in modern data analysis that `glm()` and `lm()` do not: 

Reviewer 2: There is where you define case weights to be something more than the relatively limited use of weights in classical statistics. Rewrite this paragraph to something like the following: 

Believe it or not, the logistic regression code shown above, which is a typical example of using weights in a classical statistical setting, is much simpler that we what we have to contend with in modern data analysis. There are a few things that we do in modern data analysis that where correctly using weights is not so straightforward. These include:

* Resampling (e.g. the bootstrap or cross-validation).
* Preprocessing methods such as centering and scaling. 
* Expanded measures of performance (e.g. area under the ROC curve, mean absolute deviations, Kohen's Kappa, and so on)

> 

Reviewer 2: Add ensemble weights to this list.

> A framework like tidymodels enables all of these tools and the impact of case weights is more comprehensive. 

Reviewer 2: Rewrite this to something like:
The tidymodels framework requires a more comprehensive handling of weights than those which arise in a classical statistical setting. We use the term "case weights" to encompass both classical and data science driven applications of weights in models in a framework that we can accommodate all use cases.

Additionally, the type of case weights **and their intent** affect which of these operations should be affected. 

> For example, frequency weights should affect the model fit but also preprocessing steps as well as performance estimation. If the predictors require centering, a weighted mean should be used to appropriately make sure that the mean of that column is truly zero. Let's say that sensitivity and specificity estimates are required. The 2x2 table of observed and predicted results should have cell counts that reflect the case weights. If they did not, infrequently occurring data points have as much weight as the rows that have a high prevalence. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, frequency weights should affect the model fit, the preprocessing steps, and performance estimation. If the predictors require centering, a weighted mean should be used to appropriately ensure that the mean of that column is truly zero. Let's say that sensitivity and specificity estimates are required. The 2x2 table of observed and predicted results should have cell counts that reflect the case weights. If they did not, infrequently occurring data points have as much weight as the rows that have a high prevalence. 
```

> As a counter example, importance weights reflect the idea that they should only influence _the model fitting procedure_. It wouldn't make sense to use a weighted mean to center a predictor; the weight shouldn't influence an unsupervised operation in the same way as the model fit. More critically, any holdout data set used to quantify model efficacy should reflect the data as seen in the wild (without the impact of the weights). 

Reviewer 4: The current implementation of `step_center()` uses case weights no matter the type.

> As a counter example, importance weights reflect the idea that they should influence _the model fitting procedure_. It wouldn't make sense to use a weighted mean to center a predictor; the weight shouldn't influence an unsupervised operation in the same way as the model fit. More critically, any holdout data set used to quantify model efficacy should reflect the data as seen in the wild (without the impact of the weights). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a counter example, importance weights reflect the idea that they should only influence _the model fitting procedure_. It wouldn't make sense to use a weighted mean to center a predictor; the weight shouldn't influence an unsupervised operation in the same way as the model fit. More critically, any holdout data set used to quantify model efficacy should reflect the data as seen in the wild (without the impact of the weights). 
```

> ## How does tidymodels handle this? 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## How does tidymodels handle weights? 
```

We've decided to add some additional vector data types that allow users to describe the type of weights. These data types also help tidymodels functions know what the intent of the analysis should be. 

In parsnip, the functions `frequency_weights()` and `importance_weights()` can be used to set the weights: 

```{r vec-wts}
# For the UC admissions data

> ucb$n <- frequency_weights(ucb$n)

Reviewer 3: I would write this as 

```r
ucb <- ucb %>%
  mutate(n = frequency_weights(n))
```

since `mutate()` is used earlier anyway

ucb

# For a general vector of importance weights: 
importance_weights(round(runif(10), 2))
```

> The class of these objects tell packages like recipes and yardstick if their values should be used for preprocessing and performance metrics, respectively: 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The class of these objects tells packages like recipes and yardstick if their values should be used for preprocessing and performance metrics, respectively: 
```

> * Importance weights only affect the model fit and _supervised_ recipes steps. They are not used with yardstick functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Importance weights only affect the model fit and _supervised_ recipes steps. They are not used with yardstick functions for calculating measures of model fit.
```

> * Importance weights only affect the model fit and _supervised_ recipes steps. They are not used with yardstick functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Importance weights only affect the model fit and _supervised_ recipes steps. They are not used with yardstick functions.
```

* Frequency weights are used for all parts of the preprocessing, model fitting, and performance estimation operations. 

Currently, these are the only classes implemented. We are doing a lot of reading on how the analysis of survey data should use case weights and how we can enable this and other data analysis use cases. [We'd love to hear from you](https://community.rstudio.com/) if you have expertise in this area. 

## About resampling

> This is a topic that we are still unsure about. We definitively think that importance weights should not affect of the data are split or resampled. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a topic that we are still unsure about. We definitively think that importance weights should not affect how the data are split or resampled. 
```

> Frequency weights are more complex. Suppose we are using 10-fold cross-validation with the logistic regression on the UCB admission data, should we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Frequency weights are more complex. Suppose we are using 10-fold cross-validation with the logistic regression on the UCB admission data, should we:
```

* Have all the case weights be placed into either the modeling or holdout set? 

> * Fractionally, split the case weights into both the modeling and holdout data? 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fractionally split the case weights into both the modeling and holdout data? 
```

I think I see what you were doing, but I also think this reads pretty well without the comma

For the latter case, suppose a row of data has a case weight of 100 and we use 10-fold cross-validation. We would always put 90 of those 100 into the modeling data set and the other 10 into the holdout. This seems to be consistent with the sampling of the data and is what would happen if there were actually 100 rows in the data (instead of one row with a case weight of 100). However, it does raise questions regarding data leakage by just re-predicting the same data that went into the model. 

This is also an area where we'd like [community feedback](https://community.rstudio.com/). 

## Tidymodels syntax

> Let's work through an example. We'll use some data simulated with a severe class imbalance. These functions are in the new version of the modeldata package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's work through an example. We'll use some data simulated with a severe class imbalance. These functions are in the new version of the modeldata package.
```

```{r sim-data}
set.seed(1)
training_sim <- sim_classification(5000, intercept = -25) 
training_sim %>% count(class)
```

If we would like to encourage models to more accurately predict the minority class, we can give these samples a much larger weight in the analysis

```{r sim-wts}
training_sim <-
  training_sim %>% 
  mutate(
    case_wts = ifelse(class == "class_1", 60, 1),
    case_wts = importance_weights(case_wts)
  )
```

> We strongly advise that users set the case weight column before any other tidymodels functions are used. This ensures that they are handled correctly in the analyses that follow. 

Reviewer 3: If there's a simple cautionary tale, would be nice to add to the end of this. Something like "Not doing so could result in ..."

Let's use 10-fold cross-validation to resample the data. This case is unaffected by the presence of weights: 

```{r sim-folds}
set.seed(2)
sim_folds <- vfold_cv(training_sim, strata = class)
```

We'll fit a regularized logistic regression model to the data using glmnet: 

```{r sim-model}
lr_spec <- 
  logistic_reg(penalty = tune(), mixture = 1) %>% 
  set_engine("glmnet")
```

For this model, we need to ensure that the predictors are in the same units. We'll use a recipe to center and scale the data and also add some spline terms for predictors that appear to have a nonlinear relationship with the outcome: 

```{r sim-rec}
sim_rec <- 
  recipe(class ~ ., data = training_sim) %>% 
  step_ns(starts_with("non_linear"), deg_free = 10) %>% 

>   step_normalize(all_numeric_predictors())
> sim_rec

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  step_normalize(all_numeric_predictors())
  
sim_rec
```

```

There are a few things to point out here. The recipe automatically detects the case weights even though they are captured by the dot in the right-hand side of the formula. The recipe automatically sets their role and will error if that column is changed in any way. 

> As mentioned above, any unsupervised steps are unaffected by importance weights so neither `step_ns()` or `step_normalize()` use the weights in their calculations. 

Reviewer 4: `step_ns()` doesn't have case weights support at all, and `step_normalize()` does use importance weights in the current implementation.

Author: This is an error then. The code checks to see if the step is supervised or not and unsupervised steps are not supposed to use the weights.

When using case weights, we would like to encourage users to keep their model and preprocessing tool within a workflow. The workflows package now has a `add_case_weights()` function to help here: 

```{r sim-wflow}
lr_wflow <- 
  workflow() %>% 
  add_model(lr_spec) %>% 
  add_recipe(sim_rec) %>% 

>   add_case_weights(case_wts)
> lr_wflow

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  add_case_weights(case_wts)

lr_wflow
```

Reviewer 3: Also, I was surprised about this implementation (even though I think I've seen it once). The `add_*()` functions usually add "objects" created earlier, while here `case_wts` is a column from the dataset, right? I think it would be useful to point this out since it's not like the others.

Reviewer 3: Follow up: I guess you do a bit of this in the following paragraph, but I'd still add a sentence before this code chunk as well.

```

> From here, let's tune the model. This code doesn't have to change at all. We will add some additional metrics to show the affect of the weights though: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From here, let's tune the model. This code doesn't have to change at all. Because we set the case weights column with `add_case_weights()`, tune and workflows automatically know how to pass the case weights on to the underlying parsnip model. We will add some additional metrics to show the affect of the weights though: 
```

```{r sim-tune, fig.height=4, fig.width=7, out.width="100%", dev='svg'}
cls_metrics <- metric_set(sensitivity, specificity)

grid <- tibble(penalty = 10^seq(-3, 0, length.out = 20))

set.seed(3)
lr_res <- 
  lr_wflow %>% 
  tune_grid(resamples = sim_folds, grid = grid, metrics = cls_metrics)

autoplot(lr_res)
```

> Recall that tidymodels assumes that the first level of the outcome factor is the event of interest. Since the first level of the outcome has the fewest values, we would expect that the sensitivity of the model to suffer. These results suggest that the weights are making the model focus on the majority class. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Recall that tidymodels assumes that the first level of the outcome factor is the event of interest. Since the first level of the outcome has the fewest values, we would expect the sensitivity of the model to suffer. These results suggest that the weights are making the model focus on the majority class. 
```

> For comparison, let's remove the weights then tune the same parameter values. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For comparison, let's remove the weights and then tune the same parameter values. 
```

---
output: hugodown::hugo_document

slug: case-weights
title: Using case weights with tidymodels
date: 2022-05-01
author: Max Kuhn
description: >

>     The tidymodels packages have enabled the use of case weights across many 
>     packages. This post discusses the changes. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    Support for case weights is now available across many tidymodels packages.
```

categories: [deep-dive] 
tags: [tidymodels, parsnip]
---

<!--
TODO:
* [ ] Look over / edit the post's title in the yaml
* [ ] Edit (or delete) the description; note this appears in the Twitter card
* [ ] Pick category and tags (see existing with `hugodown::tidy_show_meta()`)
* [ ] Find photo & update yaml metadata
* [ ] Create `thumbnail-sq.jpg`; height and width should be equal
* [ ] Create `thumbnail-wd.jpg`; width should be >5x height
* [ ] `hugodown::use_tidy_thumbnails()`
* [ ] Add intro sentence, e.g. the standard tagline for the package
* [ ] `usethis::use_tidy_thanks()`
-->

```{r setup, include=FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(echo = TRUE)
library(doMC)
registerDoMC(cores = 10)
library(tidymodels)
tidymodels_prefer()
theme_set(theme_bw())
```

After quite a bit of time, the tidymodels packages have finally enabled the use of case weights. There has been a ton of work and multiple technical hurdles to overcome. The diversity of the types of weights, and how they should be used, is very complex, but I think that we've come up with a solution that is fairly straight-forward for users. 

## What are case weights?

> Case weights are non-negative numbers that are used to specify how much each observation influences the estimation of a model. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Case weights are non-negative numbers used to specify how much each observation influences the estimation of a model. 
```

```{r glm}
glm_fit <-
  glm(
    Admit ~ Gender + Dept,
    data = ucb,
    weights = n,
    family = "binomial"
  )
glm_fit
```

_This is not quite right though_. There are 12 combinations of `Gender` and `Dept`. How can the model have 23 total degrees of freedom?

If we are treating our data as binomial, the traditional method for fitting this model is to convert the data to a format with columns for the number of events and non-events (per covariate pattern). Let's convert our data into that format:

```{r glm-events}
ucb_grouped_data <- 
  ucb %>% 
  pivot_wider(
    id_cols = c(Gender, Dept),
    names_from = Admit,
    values_from = n,
    values_fill = 0L
  )
ucb_grouped_data
```

Now, since there are really only `r nrow(ucb_grouped_data)` covariate combinations, the appropriate model can be created. 

```{r glm-grouped}
glm(
  cbind(Rejected, Admitted) ~ Gender + Dept,
  data = ucb_grouped_data,
  family = binomial
)
```

In both cases the model coefficients are the same; the standard errors and degrees of freedom are correct for the model with grouped data though. 

## Why is this so complicated? 

> Traditionally, the use of weights in base R functions are to fit the model and to report limited measures of model efficacy Here, `glm()` reports the deviance while `lm()` shows estimates of the RMSE and adjusted-R<sup>2</sup>.

Reviewer 5: > Traditionally in R, weights are used to fit the model and to report a few measures of...

Believe it or not, the logistic regression code shown above, which is a typical example of using weights in a classical statistical setting, is much simpler that we what we have to contend with in modern data analysis. There are a few things that we do in modern data analysis where correctly using weights is not so straightforward. These include:

* Resampling (e.g. the bootstrap or cross-validation).
* Preprocessing methods such as centering and scaling. 

> * Expanded measures of performance (e.g. area under the ROC curve, mean absolute deviations, Kohen's Kappa, and so on)

Reviewer 5: What does "expanded" mean here?

> * Expanded measures of performance (e.g. area under the ROC curve, mean absolute deviations, Kohen's Kappa, and so on)

Reviewer 5: "Additional" or "more"?

> A framework like tidymodels enables all of these tools and the impact of case weights is more comprehensive. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A framework like tidymodels enables all of these tools and the impact of case weights is more comprehensive. 
```
Tools?? I'm not sure what that is getting at. The previous list? Maybe just say "enables all of these and the impact..."

As mentioned above, any unsupervised steps are unaffected by importance weights so neither `step_ns()` or `step_normalize()` use the weights in their calculations. 

When using case weights, we would like to encourage users to keep their model and preprocessing tool within a workflow. The workflows package now has a `add_case_weights()` function to help here: 

```{r sim-wflow}
lr_wflow <- 
  workflow() %>% 
  add_model(lr_spec) %>% 
  add_recipe(sim_rec) %>% 
  add_case_weights(case_wts)
lr_wflow
```

Existing `add_*()` functions in workflows add objects (instead of data). Rather than specifying case weights in each preprocessor function (e.g. `add_formula()` and so on), this syntax is more simple and works with any type of preprocessor.  

```{r sim-tune, fig.height=4, fig.width=7, out.width="100%", dev='svg'}
cls_metrics <- metric_set(sensitivity, specificity)

grid <- tibble(penalty = 10^seq(-3, 0, length.out = 20))

set.seed(3)
lr_res <- 
  lr_wflow %>% 
  tune_grid(resamples = sim_folds, grid = grid, metrics = cls_metrics)

autoplot(lr_res)
```

> Recall that tidymodels assumes that the first level of the outcome factor is the event of interest. Since the first level of the outcome has the fewest values, we would expect the sensitivity of the model to suffer. These results suggest that the weights are making the model focus on the majority class. 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
In tidymodels, the default is that the first level of the outcome factor is the event of interest. Since the first level of the outcome has the fewest values, we would expect the sensitivity of the model to suffer. These results suggest that the weights are making the model focus on the majority class. 
```

## Why is this so complicated? 

> Traditionally, the use of weights in base R functions are used to fit the model and to report a few measures of model efficacy. Here, `glm()` reports the deviance while `lm()` shows estimates of the RMSE and adjusted-R<sup>2</sup>.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Traditionally, weights in base R functions are used to fit the model and to report a few measures of model efficacy. Here, `glm()` reports the deviance while `lm()` shows estimates of the RMSE and adjusted-R<sup>2</sup>.
```
One too many "use"
